Hang on to your hats, because you're about to go
on a heck of a ride through time, space,
and the multiverse.
Doctor Michio Kaku has been described
as today's Einstiein in many elite circles.
Add his genius for comedy and passion
for the new frontier of string field theory
of which he is co-founder,
and you have a veritable stand-up
theoretical physicist comedian.
Doctor Kaku takes subjects that are nearly impossible
for our current minds to understand,
and reduces them to common analogies,
bringing incredibly exciting new possibilities for mankind,
into clearer focus.
All I can say is, have fun with this one.
(serene music)
You hopscotched humanity through
our phases of evolution.
Right.
From where we are now,
which seems somewhat primitive
on a large cosmic scale.
Right.
And through this journey,
you talk about our interface.
Our conscious interface with technology.
Including the world of computers, et cetera.
Can you speak to that a little bit right now
in terms of where you think we're going
in a not too distant future
in our interface with technology,
and then we're gonna go on from there?
Well we physicists have asked about what civilization
will look like, 100, 1,000,
a million years beyond our technology.
And we'll be looking outer space,
we actually look for paradigms that we may see.
We look for what they call type one, type two,
and type three civilizations.
We don't look for little green men,
we look for the energy signature
of planetary, stellar, and galactic civilizations.
Where are we in that mix right now?
Well, first of all type one civilization
is a planetary civilization.
They control the weather,
they control earthquakes, volcanoes,
anything planetary they would control.
Sooner or later they exhaust the power of a planet,
hurricanes and tornadoes are child's play for them,
and eventually start to use the power of their star,
not just to get a sun tan,
but to play with solar flares.
To literally play with with the entire star,
to ignite stars, to play with stars,
like we play with coal or our fire.
Eventually they exhaust the power of a star,
and they become galactic.
They begin to colonize huge sections of the galaxy,
and they start to use black holes for example
as their primary energy supply.
Now if you look at this scale,
then you have to wonder where are we?
We are type zero, we get our energy
from dead plants, oil, and coal.
However with a calculator,
you can calculate when we will advance
to these various stages.
If we simply grow at 3% a year,
which is very modest economic growth,
then energy consumption also grows at 3%,
and we will hit type one in about 100 years.
Now you can already see the emergence
of a type one civilization everywhere you go.
When I open the newspaper,
every single headline talks about
the birth pang of a type on civilization being born,
right before our eyes.
What does that look like.
First of all, the internet, what is the internet?
The internet is a type one telephone system,
that's all it is.
We are privileged to be alive to see the birth
of a new planetary type one telephone system.
The language of type one is already out there,
most elites already speak English.
You can go anywhere on the planet earth,
scientific elite, business elite, cultural elite,
and they all speak English.
So we're already beginning to see a planetary
language being formed.
A planetary economy is also being formed,
look at the European Union.
These nations have killed each other
for the last 5,000 years
ever since the last ice age melted, ended,
and why are they banding together
to form the European Union?
To oppose us, and who is us?
We are NAFTA, okay?
So you see the emergence of a type one
economy emerging.
And globalization and outsourcing
is part of this?
A tiny weeny part, just a small part.
People react to globalization,
they don't realize it's much bigger
than just globalization.
We also see the beginning of a type one culture.
You can go anywhere on the planet earth,
and show people two pictures of a man and a woman,
instantly recognizable by anyone on the planet earth,
Madonna and Arnold Schwarzenegger.
So my God, you now know what type one
culture looks like.
It's gonna be rock-n-roll, blue jeans, rap music,
hip-hop, youth culture.
That's gonna be the currency, the language
that this type one civilization if going to speak,
going to enjoy.
So we're already beginning to see the beginnings
of a type one culture, entertainment, language,
energy supply, politics, beginning of a language,
and the beginning of, just the beginning
of a type one system.
Now we are type zero,
so the transition between type zero to type one
is the most important transition
in all of human civilization.
Think about it, it's the most dangerous
of all transitions, because there are some people
who don't wanna be in type one.
They instinctively in their gut know
that a type one system will be a system
of different discourses, of different ideas,
and clashes of ideas, and so on, and so forth.
And these people who don't want
this transition are the terrorists.
In their gut, the terrorists know that
we are headed for type one.
They can't articulate it,
they don't know the larger outlines of it,
but in their gut they don't like it.
They would rather be in type minus one.
So however I believe that this transition
from type zero to type one
is the most important transition
in the history of human civilization,
and we are privileged to be alive
to see the beginning of this transition.
Our children, and our grand children
will complete the greatest transition
in the history of the human race.
Is this not inspired by absolute necessity
because we can't live off of dead animals
and dead plants, and fossil fuels indefinitely,
is that kind of a negative point?
It's being forced upon us.
Yes.
In other words, some people say,
let's try to stop the clock,
maybe we don't wanna be part
of a planetary civilization, it's too late.
Look at the economies of the world,
like I said, European Union is forming
without anyone pushing them in that direction,
cause they know it's either the European Union
for Europe or else they gonna be wiped out
by competition from the United States,
China, and India.
And we already see the young people of the world
yearning to get on the internet,
yearning to find out what other
young people are doing.
Cause young people instinctively know
this is their future.
They instinctively know,
I wanna be part of this future.
And so I think that terrorists would like
to prevent the transition,
but I don't think they're going to,
but it's gonna be a rocky transition,
because we do have nuclear weapons,
we do have biotech technology, designer germs.
And so it may not be a transition
that's fully guaranteed.
However it's a very interesting transition,
because even film makers have been interested
in this transition.
Think of a movie that talks about
the most scientifically realistic encounter
with another intelligent life form in the universe.
In this movie, we realize that Captain Kirk
in The Enterprise is the most inefficient
way to explore outer space,
hopping from planet to planet.
There are 100 billion stars in our milky way galaxy,
perhaps half of those stars have planets
that's 50 million planets in our galaxy alone.
The most efficient way for a type three
galactic civilization to explore their backyard,
is with Von Neumann probes.
Von Neumann probes are self replicating machines,
they're robots.
They land on the moon because the moon is stable,
there's no erosion,
You can stay there for millions of years,
and it makes a carbon copy of itself.
And in fact, it makes a factory that makes
millions of copies of itself.
These robot probes then shoot out
and land on other moons.
Each one makes a million copies
of itself on a moon,
and then shoots out a million more.
So starting with one, you have a million probes,
landing on a million moons,
and you got a 1,000,000, 1,000,000 probes,
and then a million million million probes,
until you have a sphere expanding
at the speed of light,
containing these Von Neumann probes.
Now what do they do?
They land on a moon and they simply wait.
They wait for a type zero civilization
to become type one.
Type zero is not so interesting,
you have lot of fights, a lot of wars,
a lot of competing ideas, and stuff.
Type one is planetary, very civilized,
very high level of science,
very high level of an economy.
And so the probes simply wait,
until the civilization makes a transition
from type zero to type one.
Now where have we seen that before?
We've all seen this before,
this is the movie 2001.
Because Danny Kubrick in the first
five minutes of his film,
interviewed all the top astronomers,
cosmologists, and physicists,
and asked them a question,
what is the most realistic encounter
with a type three civilization?
And we laid it out.
They will land on our moon,
our moon is stable, no erosion.
The would then build factories,
waiting for a type zero civilization
to become type one.
And if you saw the movie,
there is an instant where the astronaut
touches the monolith.
And he goes like this,
because an alarm clock goes off.
And the alarm clock signals back to the home race,
we have come of age.
Well Kubrick and and Arthur C. Clarke
were off by 100 years.
It's not gonna be the year 2001,
it's gonna be 2101.
In 100 years, we will be type one,
we will have an operating moon base.
How long will it take for us to get
an operating moon base,
24 hour, 24-7 moon base?
Another 100 years.
And so I think we're right on schedule.
So maybe on our moon, there's already,
who knows?
There is already perhaps a presence
of an extraterrestrial visitation.
There have been photographs,
and essays, and et cetera,
written on a subject of having potential
discoveries of structures already existing
on the moon.
How true might that be?
Well you see,
we have no operating moon base,
we simply landed on the moon a few times,
and therefore we don't know
what kind of energy sources there are,
we haven't scanned the moon.
We don't really have a good picture
of what's inside the moon,
or what probes may exist there.
There could be a probe from a type three
galactic civilization sitting on the moon,
and we'd never know it.
Right.
Plus they may have nanotechnology.
With nanotechnology you don't have to have
Captain Kirk and The Enterprise,
they could be as big as a bread box.
You could have miniaturized probes
that are part organic, part DNA,
and part silicon.
A merger of carbon and silicon.
In a device perhaps no bigger than
you know, a bread box,
sitting on our moon, just waiting for us
to make contact with it,
waiting for us to become type one.
What about the, since we're on Hollywood,
what about The Matrix?
Now, that really engaged an awful lot of minds,
particularly those in their 20s and 30s.
What is your experience with those
kinds of potential realities,
and how do you describe where that came from,
and what that's leading us to?
Well there are two aspects of The Matrix,
one is whether or not is physically possible
to have virtual reality indistinguishable
from ordinary reality.
And second of all,
will the machines take over, okay?
So let's talk about them one at the time.
Our most advanced robots,
have the collective wisdom of a retarded cockroach.
(interviewer chuckles)
Not an ordinary cockroach.
A retarded lobotomized cockroach.
So we're not in danger yet, go ahead.
From my book Visions,
I interviewed 150 of the world's top scientists,
these are the directors of all the major
science laboratories, these are nobel laureates.
I interviewed Rodney Brooks,
who is the director of the
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
the number one laboratory in the world.
And I asked him, well how long will it take
before our most advanced robots
become as intelligent as us.
And he said, well first of all,
our most advanced robots is on Mars,
it's his godchild in some sense,
it's the Mars Rover.
It's a real automaton.
So I asked him, well how intelligent
is your grandchild, the Mars Rover?
And he said, well you know, a cockroach,
you know, a slow cockroach,
a slow learning cockroach, okay?
Now a cockroach you know,
on a table, you raise your hand,
a cockroach scans your hand
as danger, danger, danger,
runs into the cracks.
I know, I used to live in a house
with lots of cockroaches.
However, you know, the Mars rover,
if you were to raise your tentacle
to Mars Rover on Mars,
it would scan the tentacle and say,
is that a dog?
No, not a dog.
Is that a giraffe?
Six hours later, it would still be wondering
you know, is that a cow?
Meanwhile the alien would have gone whack.
It takes six hours for our most advanced robots
to walk across the room,
six hours for them to scan the room.
The robot has to figure out
where is up, where is down?
Here is a rectangle, is it a table,
or is it a square, or is it a pie,
a plate, or what is it?
The robot would scan a cup,
and it would understand all the triangles
and circles, and cylinders of a cup perfectly,
but to see it better than us?
But it would take hours
for it to finally say, ah, cup.
Cup.
You know what I'm saying?
Yes.
Robots don't have common sense.
Right.
They don't know that water is wet.
They don't know that mothers are older
than their daughters.
They don't know that animals are not like pain.
They don't know that when you die
you don't come back the next day.
They don't know that strings can pull,
strings cannot push.
They don't know that sticks can push
but cannot pull.
Robots don't know that.
Still they're not poised
to take over just yet?
Yeah.
But let's talk about more realistic interface
with technology, which is the interface
between human consciousness and say,
nanotechnology in the world of computers.
You talked about this a little bit in Visions.
Well there is gonna be a gradual merger
of silicon and carbon in the future, okay?
It's already happening.
People already living with artificial parts
in the their body,
and we love it.
Because either that or else be paralyzed,
either that or else not have use of your arms and legs.
So, and also DNA technology is getting
to the point where it will eventually
interphase with silicon.
Now of course this is far in the future,
and I think that society has to democratically,
democratically have a consensus as to how far
to push this thing, okay?
So I think that is gonna be one
direction that we're gonna go into.
Another direction is pure silicon,
Asimov wrote about the three laws of robotics
to protect us against dangerous machines.
Our most advanced robot
has the intelligence of a cockroach.
I suspect that about 20 years,
they'll probably be as intelligent
as a dog or a cat.
And perhaps in 30 or 40 years,
they'll probably be as intelligent
as a monkey.
At that point, they could get a little dangerous,
cause monkeys do have their own agenda,
they have their own plans,
their own goals, okay?
Dogs and cats may not,
but monkeys probably do.
At that point I think we have plenty of time
to put a chip in their brain, to shut them off,
if they have any murderous thoughts.
So I think there is plenty of time,
we don't have to say, oh my God,
you know, one day a robot will wake up
and will be conscious, and take over the world.
It'll be decades of experimentation
with cat-like, dog-like robots,
leading to monkey-like robots,
before we have to worry about them.
Let's jump now then from that
to the subject of your latest book,
Parallel Worlds, and talking about
going from a concept of universe to multiverse.
What does this mean?
And what is it mean to be multi-dimensional,
and how is this something that we
can take into consideration in our lives now,
as we're struggling to go out of
a zero to a one?
Well right now where we're rewriting
all the textbooks, and astronomy, and cosmology.
Cosmology is going through three revolutions,
the first revolution was initiated by Galileo,
who turned the telescope to the sky
and revealed for the first time
the true splendor of the night sky.
The second revolution was in the 1920s
with the giant telescopes like Mount Wilson,
where Edwin Hubble showed that
the universe was expanding.
So we have this picture,
this picture that the universe
is in some sense a soap bubble of some sort,
and it's expanding,
and it's slowing down.
And the soap bubble is made out of atoms,
cause everywhere we look,
we see atoms of hydrogen, helium,
and so on, and so forth.
Well that picture we now know is wrong.
Every single cosmology textbook
on the earth is being rewritten,
because we're now entering
the third era, satellites.
Satellites have forced us to confront
the fact that we may not be alone,
that our universe may not
be made out of atoms.
So first of all, our satellites have shown that
most of the universe is not made out of atoms.
Every textbook is wrong,
every chemistry class is wrong.
Your high school chemistry teacher was wrong
in saying that everything is made out of atoms.
We now know that most of the universe
is made out of dark matter and dark energy.
Dark matter makes up 23% of the universe,
dark energy makes up 73% of the universe.
The stars make up 4% of the universe,
and what about us, the higher elements?
We make up .03% of the universe.
We are by far the vast minority of the universe.
The universe is not made out of atoms,
and our soap bubble is not slowing down,
it's speeding up, it's careening out of control.
We now know that the universe is undergoing
what is called, decelerate expansion,
it's exponentially expanding,
it's gonna blow out.
We can even see the end of the universe,
and I'll talk about how the universe
will eventually die.
As I quote now from the great
philosopher Woody Allen.
Woody Allen once said, eternity is an awful long time,
especially toward the end.
(interviewer giggles)
Well, toward the end it's not gonna be pretty,
the universe will freeze over in a big freeze.
The last component of that picture
of cosmology is also wrong.
It's not just one soap bubble,
we know believe there are other
soap bubbles out there.
Soap bubbles that we per chance can't see
because it's not part of the same .03%
of what we are, right?
Well, our soap bubble, we're stuck to
our soap bubble like flies on flypaper.
We cannot leave our soap bubble,
gravity can go between soap bubbles,
but we're stuck on our soap bubble.
But we think that there are other soap bubbles.
Now they would be invisible,
because light only moves,
light is also trapped like flypaper,
flies on flypaper,
light only goes on the surface of the soap bubble.
So if there's another soap bubble right above you,
you'd never know it.
Now where have you seen that before?
That's in the famous novel, The Invisible Man.
In The Invisible Man, H.G Wells gives you
a reason for being invisible.
H says it's flatly,
the fourth dimension, hyperspace.
H.G Wells says, that we live on a plane,
we spend all our time thinking that
our plane is everything there is,
but just above us, there could be another plane.
The invisible man is invisible
because light passes right beneath him, okay?
Now when I was growing up in San Francisco,
I grew up visiting the Japanese tea garden.
My mother would spend hours with me
in the Japanese tea garden,
and I would look at the carp swimming
just beneath the lily pads.
And I would spend hours looking at them,
I would put my nose right up to the fish,
and it couldn't see me.
That their eyes are point to the side,
their universe was a two-dimensional universe.
And then I imagined,
what would it be like to be a fish?
And I said to myself, what a fantastic world,
I can move forward, backward,
left and right,
but the concept of up, up made no sense.
There is no world of up,
your eyes point to the side,
the lily pads show you the end
of the universe.
There is no world of up.
And so then I imagined a fish who was a scientist,
a scientist fish.
You must have been a trippy lone kid.
A little scientist kid swimming in a pond,
and the scientist would say, bah humbug,
there's no world of up,
there's only the pond.
What you see, is what there is,
what you can measure, is what there is,
the pond is everything, the pond is all,
there's nothing as the world of up.
And so then one day I imagined
reaching down and grabbing one of the fish,
the scientist fish.
Lifting the scientist fish up into the world of up,
what would he see?
He would see beings moving without fins,
a new law of physics.
Beings breathing without water,
a new law of biology.
And then I would put the fish back in the pond,
and what a story he would tell his friends.
He disappeared from their universe,
and wound up in a world of up.
Now today we physicists believe that
we are the fish.
We spend all our time saying, bah humbug,
there's only the world that you could
see and measure.
There is forward-backward, left-right, up-down,
and that's all there is,
the universe is what we can measure.
Well our textbooks are now having to be rewritten.
The WMAP satellite currently orbiting the earth,
its data is consistent with what
is called inflation.
Inflation was proposed by a good friend of mine,
Alan Guth at MIT.
He mentioned may win the Nobel prize
for this theory.
Inflation says that the universe expanded
in a hyper-charge big bang,
but it can it happen again, and again, and again.
And the soap bubble can fission in half
and bud, and sprout a baby soap bubble.
Universes can have babies,
Stephen Hawking calls them baby universes.
And we believe that our universe
may have come from a parent universe,
and perhaps our universe also buds
other universes.
Now what about the mathematics,
what about the tests?
Well, as I said, inflation fits all the data,
it doesn't mean it is right,
but it fits all the data.
And inflation is based on the idea,
that it can happen again, and again, and again.
But what about the theory of Inflation?
Well that's where what I do for a living
comes into the picture.
What I work kind of for a living
is something called String Theory.
I'm one of the pioneers in the subject,
I'm the co-founder of String Field Theory,
which is one of the main branches of String Theory.
Now String Theory says that
it is the theory of everything.
Einstein spent the last 30 years of his life
chasing after an equation perhaps
no more than one inch long,
that would allow him to read the mind of God.
That was the ultimate goal,
the holy grail of physics.
An equation one inch long,
just like E equals MC squared.
E equals MC squared unlock the secret of the stars,
that's why the stars twinkle.
That's why our sun burns.
That's why we have energy on the earth.
Everything on the earth, all energy on the earth,
ultimately comes from E equals MC squared.
Well that's why one of your book titles
would indicate, it's time to go beyond Einstein?
That's right.
When we go beyond Einstein now,
we now believe that string theory is
perhaps the theory of everything.
When we smash atoms,
we find more particles,
lots and lots of particles.
So why should nature be so malicious
as to give us thousands of sub-atomic particles?
In fact the situation was so bad that
J. Robert Oppenheimer,
the father of the atomic bomb, once said,
that the Nobel prize in physics,
should go to the physicist who does not
discover a new particle this year.
(interviewer chuckles)
We're drowning in particles.
When I got my PhD at Berkeley,
I had to memorize all the names
of these goddamn sub-atomic particles.
Kappa mesons, lambda particle,
pi mesons, tao mesons, hadrons, leptons.
I couldn't get my PhD unless I a bosons and hadrons.
I couldn't get my PhD unless I memorized
all the names of all these particles.
I hope that in the future, to get your PhD,
a young graduate student would simply say, string.
We think that a vibrating string has nodes.
Each node corresponds to a sub-atomic particle.
If you could get a microscope
and see into the electron, you would see a rubber band.
A rubber band
And you kick the rubber band,
and it vibrates in a different node, becomes neutrino.
You twang it and it becomes a quark,
you twang it, it becomes a lepton,
you twang it, it becomes a boson.
It does a little string.
String.
So what are we?
The sub-atomic particles are the
nodes on vibrating strings.
What is physics?
Physics is nothing but the laws of harmony,
you can write on strings.
Well, then what is chemistry?
Chemistry is nothing but the melodies
you can play on vibrating strings.
Well, what is the universe?
The universe is a symphony of strings.
And therefore what is the mind of God?
The mind of God in this picture,
is cosmic music resonating through 10,
maybe 11 dimensional hyperspace.
These strings are not ordinary strings,
these strings force physical reality
to be 11 dimensional.
What is the implication,
if we're not just third dimensional?
We've already heard from the invisible man scenario
that we can recognize a fourth dimension.
What does this mean to us?
This means that our universe
is probably a soap bubble,
a three dimensional soap bubble,
floating in 11 dimensional hyperspace.
That if we were to leave our universe
to go to another universe,
we would have to take a detour
through the 11th dimension.
Now I think that at one point when the universe dies,
this maybe our only salvation.
People ask me the question,
well your unified field theory, the theory of everything.
Is it gonna give me a better color TV?
Will I get better cable reception?
And what is in there for numero uno, okay?
Well I tell them that,
parts of the unified field theory
do give you better color television.
I mean, after all, where does color television come from?
It comes from the unified field theory.
Where does better, you know,
TV reception come from?
From the unified field theory.
But the ultimate use of the unified field theory
is to one day leave our universe.
You see, when a black hole forms, it's a hole,
and everything falls into it,
it's the ultimate roach motel.
Stars fall in, they never fall out.
But even kids tell, ask their father, they say,
daddy daddy, if everything falls into a black hole,
where does it go?
Well there's one theory that says
that where it goes is to a white hole,
at the other end of a black hole.
So think of this soap bubble,
sprouting a baby soap bubble, that's a black hole.
Matter falls into the black hole
and sprouts out the other end to create a white hole.
Now our universe is probably a white hole.
How would you know a white hole if you looked at it?
First of all it will be expanding,
things would be rushing out.
And it'll be very cool as it cooled,
and by golly, doesn't it look like our universe.
Our universe is probably a white hole.
Now in six years time,
we may be able to prove this theory.
In six years time, NASA is gonna launch LISA into orbit.
Laser Interferometry Space Antenna.
It's the most advanced satellite system
ever conceived of by the human mind.
Three satellites orbiting the sun,
connected by laser beams 3 million miles across,
dwarfing the planet earth.
Think about this,
the satellite system, a triangle,
orbiting the sun,
much much bigger than the planet earth.
You could put the planet earth
as a dot inside this triangle.
The shock wave from the big bang
is still reverberating on our soap bubble.
It'lll detect gravity waves from the instant of creation.
We're gonna get baby pictures of the infant universe.
A family album, baby pictures.
This satellite is so accurate,
that it should be able to see the umbilical cord.
The umbilical cord perhaps connecting
our baby universe, to perhaps a parent universe.
What did, we're at the science
and consciousness conference?
What is the implication of this,
in terms of our own awakening
into our own individual expanded consciousness?
Saying individual, I mean interconnectedness as well,
but what does this mean to us?
Several things.
First of all as I mentioned,
only a type three civilization
could fully utilize the power of this theory.
We're talking about the ability to bend time into a pretzel.
Rip the fabric of space time,
leap into the 11th dimension.
This is the power of a god,
that's the power of a Planck energy.
The Planck energy is the enegy
of a type three civilization.
A type three civilization would be able to open gateways,
open baby universes,
create a baby universe in a laboratory.
They would have the power of a god.
That's what this whole sequence is building up to.
So when I talked about type zero,
type one, type two, type three,
if we don't blow ourselves up
in this whole process of evolving
from a type zero civilization,
eventually we'll become masters of space and time.
That's one aspect.
The other aspect is more practical,
that is where do we fit into the larger scheme of things.
This theory, string theory is a quantum theory.
In fact, it is the ultimate quantum theory,
and all quantum theories say that everything vibrates,
everything is made out of a wave.
And because of that,
these waves inter-tangle with each other.
This is called entanglement.
An entanglement means that our waves entangle with waves
of the other side of the galaxy.
Instantly in fact, we are all connected
via this invisible web.
Einstein at first didn't like this picture,
cause if you were to move in one part of the universe,
the other part of the universe will also respond to you,
faster than the speed of light.
Einstein at first didn't like it,
but it's been shown in the laboratory.
This is the famous EPR Experiment.
It's been shown many times now,
that entanglement does in fact make possible vibrations,
traveling faster than the speed of light.
Now of course, the information
traveling faster than the speed of light
is random information.
You cannot send Morse code this way,
you cannot send tomorrow's stock exchange this way.
But what it does mean is that we're all entangled.
Our wave functions all entangled
with other wave functions.
And I should also point out in all fairness,
there is one unfinished aspect
of the foundation of the quantum theory.
The quantum theory is the most
successful theory of all time,
even more accurate than Newton's laws of gravity.
It works in the atomic realm,
but it's based on the foundation of sand.
There is the famous cat problem.
The cat problem is the most profound
paradox in the history of the universe.
At the present time,
no one has a solution for the cat problem.
What is that problem?
This is the famous Schrodinger cat problem.
Schrodinger was one of the founders
of the quantum theory,
a theory that has been tested to one part in 10 billion.
You can predict the power, the behavior of atoms
to incredible accuracy, that's why we have transistors,
that's why we have the internet,
that's why we have laser beams,
because of the quantum theory.
However, the laser beams, transistors, the internet,
is based of foundation of sand, because Nobel laureates
still argue over the cat problem.
Let's say I put a cat in a box,
and the question, is the cat dead or alive?
Well you don't really know for sure
until you look at the cat.
Let's say the cat is connected to a gun,
and the gun is connected to a Geiger counter,
and the Geiger counter is connected to uranium.
Well to describe uranium,
we have to write the wave function of uranium
which is disintegrated,
and uranium which hasn't disintegrated.
50% chance maybe that it'll disintegrate,
50% chance that it hasn't disintegrated,
that's the quantum theory.
You're working on probabilities, right?
The atomic bomb is based on this theory.
The atomic bomb wouldn't work,
if the quantum theory were wrong.
But now hook the uranium to a gun,
well is the cat dead or alive?
Well, you have to add the wave function of a dead cat
and add it to the wave function
of a life cat, simultaneously,
so the cat is neither dead or alive.
Now you may say to yourself,
well that's stupid.
How can a cat be both dead or alive?
Well the only way to tell is to open the box.
It's probability.
And then, the cat then collapses
into a dead cat or a live cat.
Well that means that observation
determined existence.
So you're now left with a very horrible,
absolutely incredible paradox.
Either the act of observation
determines the existence of a cat,
or the cat is simultaneously dead and alive.
Both alternatives are mind blowing,
both alternatives shake philosophy
to the very core.
Let's take the first alternative,
observation determines existence,
but observation requires consciousness.
Therefore consciousness makes an observation,
and then we say the cat is alive.
Well, I determine the fact, the cat is alive.
Well, who determines me?
Somebody has to look at me
to determine that I'm alive, and I'm not dead.
Well who determines him?
Somebody has to look at him,
and this is called Wigner's friend.
Wigner was the winner of the Nobel prize,
he helped to build the atomic bomb,
and this is called Wigner's friend.
I have an infinite sequence of Wigner's friend,
so who is the ultimate Wigner's friend?
God.
So starting with quantum theory,
which is the most objective reductionist
theory of all time,
you go all the way to God.
Now let's say you don't want that,
let's say you don't believe in this Nobel prize winner.
Let's say you believe in the other theory.
The other theory is even worse,
the other theory is many worlds.
Most Nobel laureates now are leading towards the second.
Steve Weinberg, winner of the Nobel prize,
has said the following.
Imagine you're in a room and many radio frequencies
are in the same room.
Your radio is tuned into one frequency,
but you're very comfortable
being in a room with many frequencies, right?
But you're tuned into one.
Well these frequencies are now wave functions.
In this room, there is the wave function of dinosaurs.
In this room, because they never died 65 million years ago,
cause a cosmic event prevented extinction of the dinosaurs.
In this room, there's the wave function of aliens.
Cause perhaps the aliens decide
to colonize the earth millions of years ago.
In this room, there's the wave function
of Alexander the Great,
perhaps he came all the way to the Americas
instead of being, just conquering most of the old world.
Think about it, your mind goes crazy,
this is the multiverse.
So welcome to the multiverse.
We now believe that perhaps
there are infinite number of universes out there.
Most of them probably dead universes,
but some of them may be separate
from our universe by a single quantum event.
The smallest quantum event is a cosmic ray.
Let's say a cosmic ray goes through Hitler's mother.
Hitler's mother has a miscarriage,
Hitler is never born.
All of a sudden perhaps 40 50 million people
didn't have to die and they're living with us today.
Or perhaps a cosmic ray went through
Roosevelt's mother,
and Roosevelt never roused the American people
to oppose the forces of the Axes,
and I'm speaking German today,
and there's a swastika behind me right now.
I mean one quantum event,
separates us from these parallel worlds.
Now some people ask me the question,
well professor, if Nobel laureates are even
arguing about this, then the question is,
is Elvis Presley still alive in one of these universes?
Many would say yes.
Well believe it or not,
there are physicists at Oxford University,
David Dodge for example,
who would say yes.
There's a universe where the king is still alive.
Wow, kids, we've got some things to think about,
and we're blown away if we think
there is such a phenomenon as our dead aunt Lily talking
through a medium to us, and you're talking about
many different potential realities.
Nobel laureates argue about this question.
This is one of the greatest unresolved
questions in all of physics.
Physics is fantastic, it's incredibly accurate,
but is based on the cat.
And at the present time
there's no consensus on the cat problem.
There are hundreds of physics conferences,
my friends attend these conferences.
Physicists yell at each other,
they scream at each other,
cause what is at stake, is reality itself.
The nature of existence, that is what is at stake.
Michio thank you so much for taking time.
My pleasure.
His newest book Parallel Worlds,
focuses on the newest multiverse theories.
I also loved his book, Visions,
which extrapolates what our lives will look like,
50, 100, 1,000, and even more years
into the future.
Like this interview,
his writing is wonderfully entertaining.
You can look at a complete selection
of his work on his website,
listed beside his name on the menu.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(mysterious music)